

🎤 Interview Preparation - by Programming Hero

নিচের প্রশ্নগুলোর উত্তর নিজে খুঁজে বের করার চেষ্টা করো এবং নিজের ভাষায় ছোট ছোট নোট তৈরি করে রাখো।

১. What is Git? What are the advantages of using Git?

২. What do you understand by the term "Version Control System"?

৩. What's the difference between Git and GitHub?

৪. Name a few Git commands with their functions.

৫. What is the difference between git fetch and git pull?






Basic Git & GitHub Interview Questions from Chatgpt : 

1. What is Git?

Answer: Git is a distributed version control system used to track changes in source code and collaborate with other developers.


2. What is GitHub?

Answer: GitHub is a cloud-based platform that hosts Git repositories and provides collaboration features like pull requests, issues, and project management.


3. What is the difference between Git and GitHub?

Git                     Vs	    GitHub
Version control system  --- 	Hosting platform
Works locally           ---    	Works online
Tracks code changes     --- 	Stores repositories remotely


4. What is a repository?

Answer: A repository (repo) is a storage location that contains project files, code, and version history.


5. What is a commit?

Answer: A commit is a snapshot of the project at a specific point in time.

Example: git commit -m "Added login page"


6. What is the staging area?

Answer: The staging area is where changes are prepared before creating a commit.

git add .


7. Which command initializes a Git repository?

git init


8. Which command checks the current repository status?
git status


9. Which command stages files for commit?
git add .

or

git add filename


10. Which command creates a commit?

git commit -m "message"


11. Which command shows commit history?

git log


12. What is a branch?

Answer: A branch is an independent line of development that allows developers to work on features without affecting the main codebase.


13. Which command creates a new branch?

git branch feature


14. Which command switches branches?

git checkout feature

or

git switch feature


15. What is the default branch usually called?

Commonly: main

Previously: master


16. Which command displays all branches?

git branch


17. What is a remote repository?

Answer: A remote repository is a repository hosted on a server such as GitHub.


18. Which command connects a local repo to GitHub?

git remote add origin REPOSITORY_URL


19. Which command uploads code to GitHub?

git push

Example: git push -u origin main


20. Which command downloads code from GitHub?

git pull


21. What is the difference between git fetch and git pull?

git fetch :

Downloads changes
Doesn't merge automatically

git pull :

Downloads changes
Merges automatically


22. Which command clones a repository?

git clone REPOSITORY_URL


23. What is a merge?

Answer: Merge combines changes from one branch into another branch.


24. What is a merge conflict? 

Answer: A merge conflict occurs when Git cannot automatically determine which changes should be kept.


25. What is a Pull Request (PR)?

Answer: A Pull Request is a request to merge changes from one branch into another branch on GitHub.


26. Why should developers commit frequently?

Answer:     Easier tracking
            Easier rollback
            Better collaboration
            Cleaner project history


27. What does this command do?

git add .

Answer: Stages all modified and new files in the current directory.


28. What does this command do?

git push -u origin main

Answer: Pushes the local main branch to the remote repository and sets it as the upstream branch.


29. What does HEAD mean in Git? 

Answer: HEAD is a pointer to the current commit and active branch.


30. What is version control?

Answer: Version control is a system that tracks changes in files over time, allowing developers to review, restore, and collaborate on code efficiently.

